# RV32IM-Softcore-VHDL
Fully pipelined RV32IM softcore processor implemented and verified in VHDL, featuring a 5-stage pipeline, complete hazard detection and resolution, execution and memory stage forwarding, and branch resolution. Synthesizable RTL design for FPGA targets.

# Project Entity Overview

### 1.) ProgramCounter- IF Stage
The program counter handles program control by telling the CPU which instruction to fetch next to insert into the pipeline. Sitting at the start of the IF stage, this entity has a single internal register which starts at a known base address for the instruction memory, such as 0x00000000, and begins counting in steps of 4. The counter increments this size because it matches our instruction set size: 32 bits. This entity is able to handle branching instructions by altering the address that will be stored on the rising edge of the next clock cycle in the internal register. This added control introduces us to conditional execution and looping mechanisms. The program counter entity has an asynchronous reset which brings the internal register back to the base address for the instruction memory.

### 2.) InstructionDecoder- ID Stage
The instruction decoder dissects each instruction into the necessary control signals for operating a 5-stage pipeline and allows for the necessary computations to be made in each subsequent pipeline stage. Residing in the ID stage, this unit is the first processing step after an instruction has been fetched. By decoding instructions, we gain the necessary insight into what hazards may be caused by this next instruction, and as such, we may use the decoded signals to stall or flush our pipeline if we choose.

### 3.) RegisterFile- ID Stage
A collection of 32 high-speed, optimal locality registers which act as the main playground for local data that the CPU is currently using for operations. This unit is critical to the CPU as it exploits data locality to ensure pipelining can occur. The register file features two read ports which allows for 2 registers to be read, and returned, simulatneously. Furthermore, this unit has a synchronous write port with a write enabling guard to ensure the new or recently processed data can be updated in the RF for use in future calculations. To prevent stale data from being accessed in the register file when a register is being written to, an internal bypass system allows for the data to be written to be passed as a read port output before the write commits into the file. This is a key feature to ensure all RAW hazards are handled appropriately.

### 4.) IntegerALU: EX Stage
This component handles all arithmetic operations for single-cycle RV32IM instructions. Whether it is addition and subtraction, bitwise logical operations, shifts, or address calculations, this unit is the heart of the CPU for computation in the baseline RV32I instruction set. This component is set in the EX stage of the pipeline which allows for decoded instructions to begin processing. 

### 5.) BranchingUnit: EX Stage
To allow for control flow, the branching unit resolves address branches back to the program counter for both conditional and unconditional branching instructions. On conditional branches, this entity takes in two operands, compares them according to the operation derived from the instruction decoder, and issues a signal telling the program counter whether it should branch or continue counting by 4. For unconditional branches, the unit automatically issues the necessary address jump signal to the program counter. The branch address is calculated in the IntegerALU entity in parallel to this unit, removing this unit from the critical path.

### 6.) MuldivUnit : EX Stage
The multiplication and division unit handles all multiplication and division instructions introduced in the M extension. An internal state machine allows this unit to appropriately handle the blocking nature of the implementations of these operations. The dynamic nature of the state machine allows for users to adjust the implementation of the multiplication and division operations however they see fit: be that Wallace trees, Booth's Algorithm, SRT divison, Newton-Raphson, etc. This means that users can tune the unit to cater to the requirements of their implementation. In this implementation, multiplication utilizes the on-board DSP blocks of the Nexys A7 100T FPGA to guarantee a 3-cycle execution time. The divison implementation is a basic non-restoring divison algorithm to ensure a ceiling or 32 CC for execution. Short circuit execution has been added to ensure edge cases, such as divide by 0 and division by 1 do no propagate thorugh the system and can return in 1 CC.

### 7.) HazardDetectionUnit : Off to the side
The hazard detection unit issues necessary flush and stall signals to defend the CPU structual, data, and control hazards. Structual hazards are solved by stalling the IF and ID stages of the CPU to prevent contention across computational units (BranchingUnit, IntegerALU, and MuldivUnit). Data hazards, such as Load-Use and RAW, are resolved through operand forwarding. There is EX-EX forwarding which forwards the outputs of the EX stage to the inputs of the EX stage soon after the rising edge of the next CC. There is also MEM-EX forwarding which forwards the output of the MEM stage to the inputs of the EX stage soon after the rising edge of the next CC. In the event of a Load-Use hazard, a necessary NOP bubble is inserted in the EX stage to ensure the MEM stage has time to load the soon-to-be consumed data. Lastly for control hazards, because all branching is resolved in the EX stage of the pipeline, we incur an unavoidable 3 CC of penalty by flushing the IF and ID stages of the pipeline to accomodate the newly fetched instruction from the branch. This unit sits off to the side of the pipeline as it monitors signals from many different stages of the pipeline.

### 8.) ForwardingUnit : Off to the side
The forwarding unit handles the generation of signals to ensure smooth operand forwarding. This unit monitors the consuming registers of the instruction entering the EX stage and compares them to the destination registers of the instructions that just completed the EX and MEM stages. A match in registers means that the currently executing instruction has accessed stale register file data and must have it's data refreshed to the most recent output. The forwarding unit prioritizes EX-EX forwarding, as this would yield the most fresh data, then conditionally checks the MEM-EX forwarding case when there is no EX-EX forwarding. This unit is important to prevent erroneous CPU behavior such as computation with stale data. As with the hazard detectio unit, this sits off to the side of the pipeline becuase it monitors EX, MEM, and WB stage signals.

### 9.) Instruction @ Data Caches
In this current iteration, there are hard coded LUT-RAM caches that act as "perfect" substitutes for real caching units. This is purely for testing purposes and will be replaced with true L1 I$ and D$s soon. The InstructionCache entity is read only and returns word sized entries. This cache is only word addressable and the size can be adjusted to whatever size necessary. For the DataCache entity, this cache must cater to byte, half word, and full word accesses for reading and writing. This cache is part of the MEM stage of the pipeline and is necessary for all load and store instructions.

# Testing procedure:
1.) Each entity has a testbench file associated with it as a form of unit testing for each component

2.) The CPUDataPath_tb file acts as integration tests, where pipeline registers will be populated to see the effect of each pipeline stage running for dedicated amounts of clock cycles.

3.) Once the CPU is synthesized, End-to-End tests will be created by comparing the CPU output to an RV32IM emulator golden output. This will act as the final pillar of verification to ensure the ISA is satisfied and the chip works as intended.

# Key Design Decisions:
1.) Initial implementation: LUT-RAM I$ and D$. The initial design uses "perfect" LUT-RAM caches to ensure 1CC hit times for the instructions and data. This is expensive in terms of resources as there is dedicated LUTs going towards storing hard coded instruction memory. The data memory is dynamic in the sense that we can store different sized chunks of memory, but there is still a small, predefined amount of D$ storage. Future implementations will have split L1 caches and a unified L2 cache which will be backed by the FPGA BRAM. Cache policies will be decided based on what I have viewed as the most common cache setup in my Computer Architecture course: WB L1 cache and WT L2 with a data buffer. This will require a small bootloader to ensure the L1 I$ is fully populated with the first set of instructions.

2.) BRAM Memory mapping. This is a preemptive decision so I can have proper space for future processor expansions such as peripheral usage, UART or Ethernet connections, and interrupt handling. Instruction memory will start at 0x00000000 and end at __________. Data memory will start at __________ and end at __________. This is an important decision because it will allow me to restrict certain parts of memory as read only, or protected.

3.) MuldivUnit implementation: this is still a tentative plan, but to implement the M extension to this ISA, I will have a seperate unit which will execute over multiple cycles. There will be a MuldivEnabled signal to allow the unit to be used, and the pipeline will stall during the multicycle execution to ensure in order execution (for the time being). This being said, there will be a resultValid flag which tells the pipeline when the result is one cycle from being ready, and on the rising edge of the next clock cycle, the pipeline will contine with the multiplication/division result being available to be latched into the EXMEM pipeline register the rising edge of the next CC. The HazardDetectionUnit will handle stalling the pipeline for these results!

4.) Forwarding: All forwarding logic is contained within the HazardDetectionUnit. For EX/EX forwarding, the rd of the currently executing instruction will be compared to the rs1 and rs2 of the currently decoding instruction. If there is a dependency, a series of MUXes will funnel the forwarded value into the appropriate operand location for the next clock cycle. The possible forwarding values are ALUOutput, MuldivOutput, and PC+4. These MUX select signals are outputted in the HazardDetection Unit as registered values! They must be registered so that they execute in the proper clock cycle. For MEM/EX forwarding, very similar logic applies, but an additional MUX select value is needed: the data result.

5.) Future decisions to be made...
